The educated Algerian Moslem is often indistinguishable in appearance and aspect from a southern Frenchman, but, if he is a practising Moslem, he may nevertheless confide to a European intimate that his life is poised between two worlds. He lives on a knife edge, on one side of which lies Paris, beckoning his intellect; on the other, Islam, Cairo and Mecca, offering spiritual sustenance that he finds nowhere in Europe. The thought of making a choice between these worlds disturbs his peace of mind, and hitherto he has been content not to have to make it.

This passivity has led many Frenchmen to forget that the choice exists. They see their Algerian Moslem colleagues and compatriots in terms of equation with themselves—of equal access to a vote, the Sorbonne, the Ecole Normale, high rank in the army, a seat in the French Assembly. They see Algeria as the home of a million Frenchmen whose industry has endowed it with flourishing vineyards and crops, a mining industry and other benefits; they see relatively little evidence of its Islamic affiliations and of the demographic pressure that makes most of it a backward area. And so they harbour the complacent conviction that “Algeria is part of France.”

This week, however, that slogan has received a blow from which it will probably never recover. On Monday, the Second College of the Algerian Assembly, which consists of the sixty Moslem members elected entirely by Moslem voters, first agreed that any minority would abide by its majority decision, and then decided by a large majority to reject the policy of integration with France that had been reiterated in a broadcast by M. Faure only the night before. Its members also decided not to take their seats in the Assembly on Tuesday, when it was due to debate the reforms which the present Governor-General, M. Soustelle, has at last brought to the boil. M. Soustelle therefore postponed the discussion, for, had he held it, not only would the session have been dominated by French colons who are bitter opponents of the changes, but it would also have been farcical, being representative of only one-tenth—the European tenth—of the population of Algeria. ■
