There has been stalemate in Korea for so long that any change in the situation—even the moving of a pawn—was bound to cause inflated hopes in the United States and exaggerated fears in Britain and Europe. President Eisenhower’s decision to allow Chiang Kai-shek’s forces in Formosa to operate against the mainland of China has done precisely that: for those who applauded it in Congress almost certainly expect too much from it, and those who attacked it in the House of Commons almost certainly fear too much from it. That is the main reason why there is now a stormy interlude in Anglo-American relations. In fact, neither decisive operations nor mortal dangers are to be expected from the kind of pin-pricks at the under-belly of Communist China that can be made by an army of 350,000 men, with inadequate artillery, an obsolete air force of 150 machines and a navy best described as ramshackle. To mount a major operation that could seriously disturb the Peking Government would require months of preparation and the direct support of American air and naval forces. Nothing of the kind is even hinted at in the President’s Message on the State of the Union, which explicitly said that his order to the Seventh Fleet “implies no aggressive intent.” The decision really leaves the military situation very much where it was, for raids against the mainland from islands north and west of Formosa have been going on for some time.

There is, moreover, no reason for thinking that the American chiefs of staff have changed their view that to get involved in full-scale hostilities with China would be to wage the wrong war in the wrong place. But military wisdom is one thing and political expediency another. The fact has to be faced that the American people are bewildered and exasperated by the failure to achieve decisive results after two and a half years of fighting. They resent particularly the fact that the United Nations forces have had to conduct their campaign within limits which suit the Chinese better than themselves; and if they have given any clear mandate for foreign policy to the new Administration it is to bring the war to an end or to reduce the American casualties at the front by using “Asians to fight Asians.” ■
