Parliament has been recalled for Wednesday to hear the outcome of the Menzies mission to Cairo on the future organisation of the Suez Canal. It is imperative to reduce the confusion that reigns in many British minds, including some in high places, about the objectives of present policy; for until these objectives are seen clearly, instead of in a haze through which diplomacy and military preparations are simultaneously discernible, no member of Parliament can very well decide what ought to be done if Mr Menzies’s team should have failed, or, still more difficult, if it has achieved only an incomplete and unsatisfactory success.

What are the facts? Last month the London Conference met and, by Egypt’s choice, became a users’ conference. Its members, though somewhat arbitrarily chosen, represented 95 per cent of the owners sending ships through the canal, and very nearly all of them held a belief that President Nasser’s impulsive and peremptory action boded no security for them, and destroyed their confidence in Egyptian management unless this were subjected to control. The conference was a success, from the users’ point of view, in that the great bulk of them—eighteen in all—reached agreement on the end they must seek if their confidence were to be restored.

The Dulles formula specified four essentials: respect for Egypt’s sovereign rights; an orderly settlement to include compensation; dependable operation without extortionate dues; and—most important of all—freedom of passage without risk of interference for political ends. So far so good. But the agreement between the eighteen covered ends only, not means; beyond sending five of its members on an exploratory trip to Cairo, it did not attempt to decide how to execute its wishes if Colonel Nasser refused to agree. Indeed, the eighteen would not, at that stage, have agreed about means if they had tried.

The danger that their unity would collapse if put to that test is brought out only too clearly by the British domestic debate on what to do next. British action in the Suez dispute has been riding two horses, not in harness. The Government, by playing host to the conference and by subscribing to its main result, implicitly accepted negotiation as the best way round an awkward bend. Yet at the same time cabinet ministers, led by an indignant Prime Minister, have given first place, not to the policy of negotiation about the future management of the canal, but to that of denouncing President Nasser as an untrustworthy fellow with whom any arrangements are valueless. ■
