The first anniversary of the outbreak of war has been celebrated by something far more effective than oratory. The Anglo-American agreement signed at Washington on Monday has the double merit of having an important bearing on the immediate phase of the war and of casting a very long shadow over the campaigns that are yet to come. The agreement provides for the transfer to the Royal Navy of fifty over-age, but still valuable and efficient, destroyers in return for the leasing to the United States of air and naval bases in British possessions in America. The sites of the bases are in two groups. The first, consisting of two points in Newfoundland and two in Bermuda, are outposts for the defence of the United States itself, and are to be leased to the United States as a free gift. The second group of sites, in the West Indies, form an outer girdle of defence for the Panama Canal; it is in return for these bases that the 50 destroyers are to be given.

This momentous and welcome exchange has been arrived at only after long deliberation in Washington. There is every reason to believe that a substantial majority of the American people would have approved an outright gift of the destroyers to Great Britain, and all the more a transfer in return for such valuable consideration. But this is election year, and Congressmen are difficult at such times to persuade in favour of any proposal that does not have unanimity of support. If the proposal had come before Congress, there would have been long and acrimonious debate. But if President Roosevelt were to take the decision himself, he had first to be sure of his legal power to do so, and secondly run the risk of being accused of dictatorial methods. A legal opinion from the Attorney-General resolved the first difficulty, and the public’s response has shown that the President has not, in fact, lost political ground.

Of the value of the exchange to both parties there cannot be any doubt. Our own most serious naval shortage is in destroyers, which are needed in very large numbers for convoy, fleet protection and patrol work. We have a large new fleet of destroyers building, but casualties have been severe. The American vessels, which are to be released immediately, will be of the greatest service; their age will not prevent them from forming a reinforcement of the most valuable and timely kind. The advantages to the United States will be no less. The chief handicap to American naval strategy has always been the lack of bases conveniently placed in the seas where the American Navy has to operate. The large distances that have to be covered have had their influence on naval design; they explain, for example, the traditional American preference for a relatively small number of relatively large cruisers, which has played its part in disarmament conferences. The new bases will thus be more than a few additional ports in which the ships of the Navy will be able to lie at anchor; they will make possible a recasting of American defence strategy.

The greatest benefit, however, lies not in the relief from an immediate strain on the British Navy or from a permanent strain on the American Navy, but in the practical evidence thus given of the way in which Britain and America complement each other’s defences. Even as little as four months ago, any Anglo-American agreement of this nature would have been regarded as an example of one-sided American assistance to Britain and denounced as such by a large part of American opinion. But events have brought clearer sight. It is no diplomatic hyperbole for the British Government to speak of their “sympathetic interest in the national security of the United States”; it has become our own sheet-anchor. And there are few in America who do not now recognise England as their only line of defence that is fully manned and in fighting trim. There could not be a clearer example of genuine reciprocity than this exchange.

With this background of mutual advantage, it is all the more satisfactory that in the details of the arrangement there is no hint of charity. Great Britain is giving full value for what she receives; the price of fifty destroyers for a century’s lease of six bases might even be called cheap. Indeed, the only free gifts are from Britain to America. One of these free gifts is the northern group of bases. The other is the solemn assurance from the British Government that, come what may, the Royal Navy will be neither surrendered nor scuttled. It means that in certain unlikely, but not impossible, circumstances the inhabitants of Great Britain would abandon themselves to occupation and starvation and would consent to be blockaded by their own fleet, rather than leave the way to the New World open to the Nazis. We do not wish to make any sordid commerce out of so solemn a resolve. It is rather to be regarded as our pledge to the cause of freedom, an expression of our confidence that America, when her turn comes, will defend that cause as tenaciously as we do ourselves and of our willingness, if we should ourselves be struck down, to place in her hands the sharpest sword we possess. ■
