The Far East is clearly moving into another time of troubles. By this weekend the truce negotiations at Panmunjom in Korea will have lasted a full month beyond what was supposed to be their deadline, and there seems to be less chance than ever of a genuine truce resulting—though, Communist methods of negotiation being what they are, the reservation must always be made that appearances may be deceptive. Farther south, there are ominous reports of strategic railway building and troop movements by the Chinese on the border of Viet Nam. It should not be taken for granted, even with these sinister indications, that Mao Tse-tung is bent on war. His intentions may fall into any one of a large variety of possible combinations. He may sign a truce in Korea and keep it. Or he may sign a truce and break it when the winter is over. Or he may refuse to sign and start large-scale fighting again. Or he may break off negotiations for a formal truce but continue to observe an informal one. And any one of these possibilities might or might not be combined with aggression either in Indo-China or in Burma. The policy of the western alliance has to be drawn to cover any one of these manifold possibilities.

Against these gloomy reflections can be set the great gain to the solidarity of western policy that was accomplished by Mr Churchill and Mr Eden in Washington. It is true that complete unanimity of view was not achieved, nor even claimed. It may even be true that, when Mr Churchill and Mr Eden say they will do all they can to harmonise British and American policies, they are not in fact promising more than Mr Attlee and Mr Morrison would have been willing to perform if it came to the point. But it is none the less an important step forward to have removed the appearance of a fundamental divergence of view between the two leading powers of the western world. It can, of course, be said that this new harmony was only purchased by British concessions. Mr Churchill praised the American decision to keep the Communists out of Formosa, and both he and Mr Eden uttered words of warning to the Chinese of the consequences that would follow from any further aggressions. All of these sound like British concessions; they say more than the Labour Government was ever ready to say; and they therefore lay Mr Churchill open to the criticism of being more subservient to Washington than Mr Attlee. Moreover, so far from there being any visible concessions from the American side to the European point of view—which has certainly been in the past the majority view in the United Nations—circumstantial reports have been coming from Washington of American plans to take the war into China if it flares up again. All this is naturally disturbing, and Mr Churchill will hear about it in the House of Commons. He can, however, with full justification make the defence that if he has succeeded in convincing the Americans that he is a trustworthy ally in the Far East as elsewhere, he will have far more opportunity of influencing American policy towards moderation than ever Mr Attlee did. ■
