A year ago Germany went to war. Today, after twelve months’ successful campaigning, she has added six and a half independent States to her Empire—a formidable record of conquest. And she is now faced with the conqueror’s problem of creating a system which will perpetuate domination and reconcile the subject peoples to the fate of being dominated. Committed to the creed of the Herrenvolk and the predatory neo-mercantilism which such a creed entails, Hitler cannot attempt the solution of political autonomy and independent economic development; he is caught in the vicious spiral in which the conqueror’s economic exploitation only intensifies the sense of aggrieved and separate nationhood which it must be his political aim to suppress.

The fact that Germany has not yet fully committed herself to the Gleichschaltung of Europe is largely due to the fact that she has not yet won the war. On the western fringe, the Nazis must walk delicately. Their own conquest of Norway is an example of what can be accomplished by comparatively light military forces when coupled with treachery in the invaded State. Yet Germany had not more than a tiny proportion of the population actively supporting her. The rest went by indifferent default. But if this indifference were stung to violent opposition, Britain might be able to count on the sabotage not of one but of nineteen-twentieths of the community when the hour of reconquest struck. It is no coincidence that Germany’s attempts to spare the Western States the grosser sorts of outrage have been coupled with a sustained and very resourceful attempt to blacken Britain and to pin on her the role of Europe’s greatest enemy. At all costs Germany must prevent the turning of the Quisling tables.

It is, thus, only in her conquests to east and south that we can study the real nature of Germany’s colonial system, and even here Poland is exceptional. The Nazis appear to regard the Polish race rather as they regard the Jews. Unlike the blood of Scandinavians or “Anglo-Saxons,” the blood of the Poles is not merely negatively inferior in that it is not German. It is positively pernicious. The Poles cannot by losing their separate racial consciousness become merged in the Germanic bloodstream. They must be rejected by the healthy Teutonic body as the Jews are rejected.

To the usual horrors of racial persecution—the execution of all potential leaders, the closing of universities and schools, forced labour, expulsions from ancestral land in the interests of incoming German colonists—the Germans are adding the far more terrible threat of extermination. Some eighteen million Poles live in German-occupied territory, yet Hitler’s rantings in the last year have often denounced the figure of ten millions as “too high.” It is estimated that war and exposure have reduced the Polish population by about four millions since September 1939. The gross overcrowding on the poor land of the former Government General, which the Nazis achieved by the simple expedient of driving the Polish peasants from their lands beyond the Vistula, will, since it is combined with sustained and wholesale looting of Polish food stocks, reduce the number of Poles still further in the coming winter. At the same time, compulsory sterilisation on a wide scale is an insurance against the future of a race whose fertility has been proved to be greater than the Germans’ own.

The recent abolition of the Government General and the incorporation of all Polish territory in the Reich is in keeping with this policy of extermination. The land is to be handed over to the Germans as it “falls” vacant. The fiction was only preserved so long as a sop to Italy—who is now in the war—and as the basis for peace offers, which are at last seen to be fruitless. ■
