What has been going on in Korea for nine months has entered a new phase. This is not just because a hideous winter is past, the iron-hard paddy fields have melted into trackless mud, and the heat and dust of another Korean summer are on the way. Public attitudes about Korea are changing too; there is a feeling that something new has happened in the last two months—even though the stalemate in the field continues, in the sense that neither side has won, or is likely to be able to win, a decisive military victory.

Three events have helped to create the impression that the situation has changed. These are the United Nations advance northwards and the huge Chinese losses. Nearly all along the line, the United Nations forces under Lieutenant-General Ridgway’s command now stand once again on the 38th parallel—a most striking recovery from the winter setback when Chinese forces intervened, and an event that General Ridgway himself said only three weeks ago would represent “a tremendous victory.” Equally, General MacArthur’s self-inspired invitation to the Chinese commander to call a cease-fire, whatever may be said about its propriety, was at any rate a call from strength, a summons with more than a hint that if the Communists did not comply Manchuria would eventually be bombed and the Chinese mainland invaded.

Thirdly, there is renewed activity in the United Nations to draft a new declaration of policy about Korea; this would be based on a recognition that the cost in blood and effort of regaining territory up to the parallel has made the General Assembly’s aim of unifying the country out of date since it was laid down last October.

General MacArthur’s latest statement of policy, made as usual without consulting Washington, has caused the most violent anger in the Administration. It was at first well received in many parts of the world—not excluding this country—because it seemed to coincide with the heartfelt longings of all who want military victory to lead to peace instead of further war. But it is in reality one of the most mischievous of all his pronouncements and it cannot be excused by the argument that General MacArthur has had to make policy for himself because no one at Washington had sufficient courage to lay down policy for him. ■
