Britain’s gas industry is now experimenting with alternatives to the traditional carbonisation processes that yield gas as a main product and coke as a by-product. Today the industry is looking beyond these processes to a wide array of alternatives. The reasons, economic and technical, are inescapable. Coking and gas coals have been rising in price even more than coal in general, and seem likely to go on doing so. Carbonisation processes such as the continuous retort and the coke oven require immensely costly plant, and have reached a technical maturity where they offer little chance of further gains in efficiency. So the “coke plus gas” service, beset by strong competition from electricity and oil, is in danger of being priced out of its main traditional markets.

Yet this necessity may offer wholly new opportunities. The coke made with gas out of a ton of coal costs nearly as much to transport as the coal itself, so the industry has never been able to exploit the economies of making gas where coal is cheap at pitheads and piping it to market. Gas production without coke could cut transport costs. It would also enable the industry to seek higher efficiency by producing in larger and larger units. Gasification processes that make the raw fuel completely into gas would spread their costs over a larger volume of their main product and, if practicable with coal, they will be practicable with much cheaper coal. From it they will be able to make gas of higher quality than today, feeding it directly into the high-pressure mains of a national grid.

This interlocking pyramid of technical possibilities, which competition from stronger fuels has obliged the industry to investigate, offers a hope of turning the tables. New techniques might enable gas to compete not only in the selective market for cooking and supplementary heating, but also as a general fuel for all kinds of heating. If gas could be supplied cheaply enough to meet solid fuels on price per useful therm, it could transform the commercial situation of this industry. ■
