The Minister of Housing has shown beyond doubt that he can beat the Labour party at its own game. Last year 240,000 houses were completed, compared with 195,000 in 1951. The Opposition has for some time been hard put to it to explain away such a big improvement over its own record. The most usual explanation is that Mr Macmillan has built more houses by building “rabbit hutches,” but that argument is somewhat sabotaged by the claim that the credit for the “People’s House” properly belongs to his predecessor. Yet there is no gainsaying the fact that house building was speeded up in 1952; the average construction time fell from twelve to eleven months. Nor is there any denying that more houses were started. For all practical purposes, the target set up by the Conservative party conference in 1950 will have been hit—and mainly by building more council houses, not by a great turnover to private building.

As a socialist housing minister Mr Macmillan is a great success. Political honour is satisfied. No doubt it would have been more congenial for Mr Macmillan to frame a new housing policy for Tory reformers, and there is now no reason why he should restrain himself. There have, indeed, been hints lately that he intends to make a new start. The need is urgent. Judged by any standard except the quantity of bricks and mortar, his housing policy has three disadvantages.

First, it is pursued at heavy economic cost. House building has been allowed to increase when other forms of investment have been cut. In order to escape from inflation and to rescue the British balance of payments, Mr Butler has had to mortgage the future efficiency of British industry; and the defence programme was slowed down. The determination to build 300,000 houses a year has been the chief reason why credit policy was first deprived of the full effect it should have had throughout the economy, and then undermined by the tide of local authority borrowing. It is therefore chiefly due to housing that a remarkable improvement in the terms of trade has left the British economy still precariously balanced. ■
