The visit of Mr Dulles and Mr Stassen to Europe must be judged to have been a success. They met the men they will have to deal with; they learnt a good deal; they brought fresh air into some stuffy rooms; and they were able to put glosses—no doubt perfectly sincere assurances—on things recently said both by the new President of the United States and his Secretary of State. That the French should be alarmed at things they believe to have been said to the Germans was only to be expected; and that the Germans should be suspicious of French terms for ratifying the treaty for a European Defence Community was also to be expected. The fact is that within the Atlantic alliance there are divergent interests and antagonistic feelings; just as within the Republican Administration there are conflicting interests and personalities at odds. There is also an enemy listening and guessing, both in the Far East and on the frontiers of free Europe.

It is easy to forget nowadays the tremendous effort that statesmen everywhere had to make before voters and politicians became acclimatised to the cold war and understood just what Stalin means by peaceful co-existence. Much that was then said has taken root in the form of comforting clichés, which have played a useful part in persuasion and argument but at the same time conceal important realities. The statement that the cold war is with us for the rest of the century has become an argument for a patience which might easily become sterile; and the statement that the potential strength of the free world is far greater than anything the Communist states can muster has encouraged complacency rather than a determination to mobilise that strength to the point where negotiation with Moscow might be not only possible but profitable.

Yet the differences are not nearly as great as they seem. There are two propositions on which everybody in the free world would agree. The first is that a cold war such as the present is infinitely preferable to a hot, global, atomic war. The second is that if there is a way of ending the cold war and getting back to normality without going through the furnace of a hot war, it is worth taking calculated risks to attain it. The policy of every western government is made up of both these elements—but in different proportions. ■
