British ministers are on their way to Washington with their advisers to discuss with the new American Administration the next stage in the Government’s somewhat mysterious plan for making the pound sterling once more freely convertible into other currencies. It is unlikely to be a decisive stage. For one thing, the Americans have made it clear that they are not at present prepared to do more than listen to what their visitors have to say. And for another thing, promises have been given to the French and other European governments that nothing will be decided until there has been opportunity for consultation with them, either at the next meeting of the Council of the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation on March 23rd or elsewhere. The present delegation, therefore, in spite of its impressive calibre, is going on no more than a voyage of exploration.

Indeed the chief outcome to be awaited is that the public, in Britain and elsewhere, may at last find out what the plan consists of; if the whispering galleries of Washington keep a secret of this nature it will be an event without precedent. It is now a full year since the convertibility plan first evolved. In the intervening period it has been almost continuously discussed in ever-widening official circles. It has lost the character (if it ever possessed it) of a spectacular “dash to freedom” for the pound sterling. It is known to include three lines of action: first, that some holders of sterling who are not at present free to convert it legally into other currencies shall be allowed to do so; secondly, that the rate of exchange between sterling and the dollar, though not “set free” in the sense of being liberated from all control, shall be divorced from its present parity of $2.80; and thirdly, that the United States Government, or international institutions possessed of large dollar resources, shall be invited to put up a guarantee fund to ensure the success of the operation.

That British financial policy should be directed towards the goal of liberating sterling from the present restrictions on its free exchange is a proposition from which very few people would wish to dissent. All those who believe that free trading is wherever possible to be preferred to official control must work for full convertibility. Disagreements can arise only about the methods of freeing the pound, about the timing of the various steps and about the order in which they should be taken. But on this tactical plane, it is difficult not to feel severe doubts about the Government’s proposals. ■
